For example, severe trauma can
temporarily send someone who is
otherwise healthy into a mode of
experiencing that is essentially
borderline or even psychotic. If you're
attacked in an alleyway, you will
immediately regress to a borderline mode
of thinking and perceiving. The attacker
is bad and you're in existential danger.
Your thoughts will be dominated by
paranoid anxiety, the fear of
annihilation. In that moment, there's no
room for nuance or empathy. You're not
concerned with the attacker's backstory,
socioeconomic conditions, or systemic
factors. Survival is the only concern.
The fact that your perception of
imminent danger is accurate in this
particular situation is beside the
point. The state of mind itself is
essentially the same as what borderline
or psychotic individuals experience,
only far more frequently and in a
greater variety of situations. For
psychotic or borderline individuals,
this hypervigilant all or nothing mode
of perception can be triggered not just
by a violent assault, but by something
as minor as a perceived slight at the
deli. Regardless of the objective
threat, the physiological and
psychological response is essentially
the